h2. Building on the Edge

The purpose of this guide is to help developers who want to work with the very latest code from Github. It covers how to:

* Get the latest copy of the source code from Github.
* Build and install BrowserCMS as a gem.

If you want to get BrowserCMS the easy way, see "Getting Started":getting_started.html instead.

This guide is for BrowserCMS *3.1*. Some code shown here may not work with older versions of BrowserCMS.

endprologue.

h3. Things you need first

Before you can build BrowserCMS locally, there are few other bits of software you should have installed.

# *Git* - Distributed version control system. The code for BrowserCMS is on "Github":http://github.com/browsermedia/browsercms, so you need to have "Git":http://git-scm.com fetch the code.
# *Rails 2.3* (or later) - We make use of some of the newer features from Rails like templates.
# *A Database* - Either Mysql or the Sqlite gems should be installed. MySQL is required if you want to do development on the core. 
# *Jeweler* - Another gem "Jeweler":http://technicalpickles.github.com/jeweler is required to build the gem yourself locally.

h3. Getting the source from GitHub

To build the gem from source, and install it on your system, type the following:

<shell>
$ git clone git://github.com/browsermedia/browsercms.git
</shell>

h3. Installing the Gem locally

Once you have the source code, you can build and install the Gem via:

<shell>
$ cd browsercms
$ rake install
</shell>

This will use Jeweler to build and install the gem. Once you have the BrowserCMS Gem installed,
you can use it to create new projects, which will be configured to use it. At this point, you now have the gem installed,
so you can follow the instructions in "Getting Started":getting_started.html.
