h2. Getting Started

The purpose of this guide is help new developers get up and running with BrowserCMS. It covers how to:

* Install the BrowserCMS gem
* Create a demo project to explore BrowserCMS
* Create a blank project for building a website from scratch    

endprologue.

h3. This Guide Assumes

Before you can create a project using BrowserCMS, you will need to have the following installed.

# The "Ruby":http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/downloads Language
# The "RubyGems":http://rubyforge.org/frs/?group_id=126 packaging system
# The "Rails":http://rubyonrails.org/download framework (2.3 or later - But not 3.0 yet) 
# A working installation of "SQLite":http://www.sqlite.org/ or "MySQL":http://www.mysql.com/ as well as the gems for your database of choice.

h3. Starting a demo project

This section of the guide will cover creating a sample website with BrowserCMS, using a demo website layout and content.
 The goal is to give you some content and templates to play with to explore the CMS. Later sections of this guide will
 cover the more common cases where you are creating a new website from scratch and want only the bare minimums.

h4. Installing BrowserCMS

BrowserCMS is packaged as a gem which can be included in any Rails project. To install the gem, do the following:

<shell>
$ gem install browsercms
</shell>

h4. Creating a Demo Website

Run the following from your terminal window.

<shell>
$ browsercms project_name -m demo
$ cd project_name
$ script/server
</shell>

This will create a BrowserCMS project which used SQLite as the data storage. You need to have the sqlite3-ruby gem installed for this to work.

h4. Using your Site

Open your browser to "http://localhost:3000/cms":http://localhost:3000/cms to log into the admin for the CMS. Enter the default username/password (in development mode) is username=cmsadmin, password=cmsadmin. You should be now be logged in, viewing the home page of the site. You can now edit or add new content via the admin interface.

To learn more about the types of things you can do with BrowserCMS, see the "User's Guide":user_guide.html.

h3. Starting a 'Real' project

Demo sites are fine for learning the ropes, but when its time to start working on a 'real' project, you don't want a lot
of dummy data that needs to be cleaned out. To start a typical, 'blank' project, you can run the following command. Here
we will specify the -d flag, which will use MySQL as the database.

Run the following:

<shell>
$ browsercms project_name -d mysql
$ cd project_name
$ script/server
</shell>

You need to have the mysql gem installed for this to work. This is going to create the development and testing copies of
the database, migrate the db, populate it with the bare minimum content it needs, and copy all of the necessary files
from the gem into the rails project. Open your browser to "http://localhost:3000/cms":http://localhost:3000/cms to log in,
using cmsadmin/cmsadmin as the username/password.

h3. The short command

There is a shorter version of the command line script, which works identically to the longer form detailed above.

<shell>
$ bcms project_name -d mysql
</shell>

No difference in functionality, just less to type.

h3. Getting Command line Help

You can get assistance from the commandline tool by running +browsercms+ with no arguments, like so:

<shell>
$ browsercms
</shell>

This will show common usages, as well as all the help options available. The +browsercms+ command piggybacks on top of the
+rails+ command, so many of the options available are the same as +rails+, including +-f+ or +--force+.

h3. Trouble Shooting

This section covers some potential problems you might run into when trying to create a BrowserCMS project.

h4. Creation fails to create MySQL Database

BrowserCMS will attempt to create and populate the database. When running against mysql, Rails will assume you have a username called +root+ with an empty password.
The database create/migrations will fail if you don't have that username/password set. If this occurs, you can update the config/database.yml with correct username/password
 and rerun the +bcms+ command which will regenerate the entire project.

 Choose 'n' (No) when it prompts you to overwrite the config/database.yml and then 'a' (Overwrite all) for all files after that.
 This should complete the project generation using the new username/password.


h3. Deploying to production

Once you get ready to start deploying your application into production environments, be sure to review the "Deployment Guide":deployment_guide.html.
There are several 'gotchas' to be aware of that may differ from deploying other Rails applications. 
