h2. BrowserCMS Reference Documentation

These guides are designed to provide details on how to work with BrowserCMS, and to assist in understanding how different parts of the CMS work together. As a Web Content Management system, there are two general pieces to understand; how to use the CMS interface to build websites and how to extend/deploy BrowserCMS websites.

These guides are for BrowserCMS v3.1.0.

endprologue.

h3. Getting Started

h4. "Getting Started with BrowserCMS":getting_started.html

Everything you need to know to install BrowserCMS and create your first website.

h3. Using BrowserCMS

h4. "Interface Guide":user_guide.html

Designed as an overview of the BrowserCMS interface for Cms editors and site builders.

h3. Installation / Deployment

h4. "Installing a Module":installing_modules.html

How to add a module to your BrowserCMS project.

h4. "Deployment Guide":deployment_guide.html

How to configure Apache and Passenger to work with BrowserCMS in production mode.

h3. Developing on BrowserCMS

h4. "Content Blocks":content_blocks.html

This guide covers how to create, customize and use Content Blocks.

h4. "Portlets":portlets.html

This guide covers how to create and customize Portlets.

h4. "Building Templates":building_templates.html

This guide covers how to create and organize page templates which govern the design/theme of a website.

h4. "Building Modules":building_modules.html

This guide covers how to create new modules to be packaged and shared with other BrowserCMS developers. (In Progress)

h4. "Building on the Edge":build_it_yourself.html

For developers who want the very latest source code from Github and build the BrowserCMS gem themselves.

